---
layout: post
type: post
title: "On building FilBench: An LLM Evaluation Suite for Filipino"
date: 2025-07-15
category: projects
comments: true
author: "LJ MIRANDA"
published: true
tags:
  [
    nlp,
    language technology,
    natural language processing,
    tagalog,
    low resource,
    llm,
    machine learning,
  ]
description: |
  This blogpost introduces FilBench, an LLM evaluation suite for Filipino.
  I will also reflect on some aspects of building FilBench, which is a truly grassroots effort.
  FilBench will be foundational to drive progress in Filipino NLP.
excerpt: |
  This blogpost introduces FilBench, an LLM evaluation suite for Filipino.
  I will also reflect on some aspects of building FilBench, which is a truly grassroots effort.
  FilBench will be foundational to drive progress in Filipino NLP.
---

<span class="firstcharacter">A</span>t the end of 2024, I wrote about several [missing pieces in Filipino NLP](/notebook/2024/12/17/filipino-llm/).
One of which is **evaluation**.
I said that most of "how we measure LLM capabilities in Filipino are anecdotal: we post a screenshot of ChatGPT writing in Filipino and claim that it alredy has that capability&mdash;we need a systematic approach to evaluating these models."
Fast forward to today, I'm happy that we are now inching towards systematic evaluations for Filipino.

Without further ado, I introduce **FilBench**, an LLM Evaluation Suite for Filipino!

## FilBench is opinionated in what it's testing

I am excited to see that after my [Missing Pieces](/notebook/2024/12/17/filipino-llm/) blog post, benchmarks targeting Filipino (or Southeast Asian language) capabilities came out.
Notable examples include [SEA-HELM](), and its Tagalog subset, [Batayan]().
This shows that the research pulse right now is on evaluation.

Compared to these benchmarks, FilBench aims to be more opinionated on what it's testing.
We start by taking stock of what many Filipino NLP researchers are evaluating pre-GPT language models upon, and creating a taxonomy of capabilities consisting of Classical NLP, Cultural Knowledge, Reading Comprehension, and Generation.

## A Grassroots Effort

One thing that's really exciting about building FilBench is that I'm like assembling the Avengers of Filipino NLP.

## What's next?
