---
layout: post
title: "Exploratory Data Analysis: Energy Use in the Philippines"
date: 2017-01-18
category: projects
comments: true
author: "LJ MIRANDA"
---

> This was my very first data science project (circa 2016). You can find the original post in [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/ljvmiranda/philippines-energy-use).

I am investigating the country's energy use given the World Development
Indicators dataset provided here in Kaggle. I am particularly interested to
how the Philippines has been performing over time, as well as how it performs
compared with its South-East Asian Neighbors. If you have any questions or
suggestions, do not hesitate to reach me through the comments below. I would
like to hear and learn from you!

1. [What percentage of the population has access to electricity?](#access-to-electricity)
    -  [Access to electricity over time](#access-to-electricity-over-time)   
    -  [Comparison to South-East Asian (SEA) countries](#sea-comparison)
2. [What constitutes my country's energy mix?](#energy-mix)
    - [Energy Mix in the Philippines](#energy-mix-in-the-philippines)
    - [Comparison to South-East Asian (SEA) countries](#comparison-to-sea-neighbors)
        - [Fossil-Fuel use](#fossil-fuel-use)
        - [Renewable Energy Adoption](#renewable-energy-adoption)
3. [How are we consuming our energy?](#energy-consumption)
    - [Electric Power Consumption over time](#electric-power-consumption-over-time)
    - [Consumption footprint](#consumption-footprint)
4. [Conclusion](#conclusion)

## Access to electricity

The charts below show the percentage of the urban and rural population with
access to electricity and the comparison of the country's performance with
its neighbor south-east Asian nations.

### Access to electricity over time


![Access to electricity over time](/assets/png/eda-energy/output_6_1.png)


The chart above shows the population's access to electricity over a period of
20 years. Although there was a sharp division of resources in the 90s, access
to this need is being resolved as time progresses. It is commendable that the
government (as well as the private companies) has started putting effort to
provide electricity to rural communities at the onset of the millenium.

It is also interesting to note that the years with a steeper slope started in
2010, and this can be credited to the previous administration (and the
corresponding electricity conglomerates) for continuing the steep rise done
in the previous years.

### SEA Comparison

![SEA Comparison](/assets/png/eda-energy/output_9_1.png)

One can observe that both Philippines and Indonesia started out similarly in
the 90s, yet because of the steepness of Indonesia's slope in the chart, it
was able to follow the leading countries&mdash;even overtaking Thailand in
the year 2000. However, it may also be important to investigate the state of
these countries before 1990s in order to see how this progression came to be.

Top-performing countries in achieving the goal of universal access to
electricity are Singapore, Malaysia, and Thailand. Achieving almost a 100% by
the turn of 2012. Singapore, on the other hand, is a consistent performer,
allowing its population to have access to electricity for 20 years.

## Energy Mix

Equally important in understanding the country's energy use is to know where
our energy is being sourced from. This section will look into the different
sources of energy&mdash;fossil fuels (coal, natural gas, petroleum),
hydroelectric, and renewable in order to gain insight to where most of our
electricity is coming from.

Moreover, a comparison with the SEA top-performers (in terms of providing
electricity access) will be done in order to assess where the huge bulk of
the electricity\textemdash that they are sourcing effectively to the
population&mdash;is coming from.

Lastly, it is also important to investigate the country's adoption to
renewable energy, and compare this with our SEA neighbors. This can help
identify trends, especially that using fossil fuels contributes much to our
carbon footprint&mdash;given the devastating results of global warming and
climate change.

### Energy Mix in the Philippines

![Energy Mix in the Philippines-1](/assets/png/eda-energy/output_13_1.png)


![Energy Mix in the Philippines-2](/assets/png/eda-energy/output_14_1.png)

It is evident that the country is still reliant to fossil fuels as a main
source of energy. Hydroelectric easily caught up and is a stable source to
the fifth of our energy supply in the country. Interestingly, the
contribution of renewable energy in the country is comparable to that of
hydroelectric&mdash; and by combining the two together, one can see that
these "clean" sources of energy contributes more than a fourth of our total
energy mix.

Looking at the country's fossil fuel mix, one can see that our use of
petroleum has significantly dropped for the last 20 years. This has been
replaced by other fossil fuels such as natural gas (during the 1980s) and
coal (during the 2000s).

### Comparison to SEA Neighbors

This section looks into the position of the Philippines with respect to the
use of fossil fuels and the adoption of renewable energy through time.

#### Fossil Fuel Use


![Fossil Fuel Use](/assets/png/eda-energy/output_18_0.png)


The use of fossil fuel in the energy mix is shown in the figure above. It is
interesting that the top-players in providing access to electricity in their
respective population---Singapore, Thailand, and Malaysia---are sourcing
their energy mostly from fossil fuels.

The Philippines, on the other hand, is fourth from below in the level of
fossil fuel that constitutes the energy mix. The first in this list is
Myanmar, where fossil fuel constitutes 20 to 40% of the energy mix.

#### Renewable Energy Adoption

![Renewable Energy Adoption](/assets/png/eda-energy/output_21_1.png)

The figure above shows the renewable energy adoption of different SEA
countries over time. It is interesting to note that the Philippines is
leading the renewable energy race, then followed by Indonesia and the rest of
the SEA countries.

## Energy Consumption

With the knowledge of the country's energy sources, the next step is to un-
derstand how we consume that energy. This section will first look into the
country's electric power consumption over time, then look at our consump-
tion footprint&mdash;particularly that of carbon emissions and other
greenhouse gases.

### Electric power consumption over time

![Electric Power Consumption over time](/assets/png/eda-energy/output_25_1.png)

It can be observed from the chart above that the power consumption in the
country has increased from about 200 kWh to 700 kWh over time. It is expected
that this consumption will increase, and this corresponds to unprecedented
effects in our environment; as we continue utilizing different sources for
our electricity use.

### Consumption footprint

![Consumption footprint](/assets/png/eda-energy/output_28_1.png)

These unprecedented effects are what we often call as our consumption foot-
print, for it leaves traces in nature that we may not expect. This section
will look into our carbon footprint and different greenhouse gases, taken
mainly from our use of fossil fuels as energy source, and through our
continued consumption of electricity (managed or not).

Similar to the rise of our electric consumption, our carbon footprint has
increased steadily for the last few years. Different sources have contributed
to this, the first mainly by liquid fuel, then followed by solid fuel and
then by gaseous fuel. It is expected that this trend will continue to rise,
and its effects might be felt if left unmitigated.

## Conclusion

This report looks into World Bank's World Development Indicators in order to
understand the energy situation in the Philippines. Three aspects were
considered|the access to electricity of the population, the energy mix, and
the energy consumption and footprint.

The country's access to electricity is being resolved through time,
increasing the rural population's access for the last twenty years. However,
much work is to be done, for the country is only 6th compared to its SEA
neighbors in this category. However, much can be said in the country's energy
mix, for the use of fossil fuels (although still in majority) is being offset
by hydroelectric and renewable sources of energy. In fact, the country is
leading among its SEA neighbors with respect to the renewable energy
adoption. Lastly, the electricity consumption of the country is still on the
rise, and will still be, given the trend for the last twenty years. This can
then be followed by an increasing carbon footprint, which may lead to
unprecedented effects if left unmitigated.

#### Changelog
* 06-11-2018: Add original Kaggle link
