---
layout: post
type: post
title: "The shape of multilingual synthetic data via topological data analysis"
date: 2026-05-28
category: notebook
comments: true
author: "LJ MIRANDA"
published: true
tags:
  [
    nlp,
    topology,
    synthetic data,
    research,
    natural language processing,
    llm,
    multilingual nlp,
  ]
description: |
    In this blog post, I jot down my notes and early explorations on topology to better understand
    multilingual synthetic data.
excerpt: |
---

<span class="firstcharacter">F</span>or the past few months, I've been exploring how we can obtain high-quality multilingual data at scale.
A common approach is to collect this data from native human speakers, giving us **natural data**, but this process is quite costly and time-consuming.
Another option is to generate from language models (LMs), giving us what we call **synthetic data**.
In my recent work, [Polyglot Teachers](https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.11290), I evaluated which models are good at generating multilingual data&mdash; it's quite empirical and rigorous.
However, I want to take this a bit further: is there a fundamental *shape* for natural data? And how close are current synthetic datasets to it?
I find this interesting because it has a lot of potential applications such as guided data generation or measuring the quality of synthetic data.

Luckily, we can glean some insights from the field of [topological data analysis (TDA)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topological_data_analysis).
TDA is largely influenced by topology and geometric learning, with the goal of understanding the structure of data.
One of my favorite introductory readings to the field (and also my main reference for this blogpost) is [Chazal and Michel (2021)](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1710.04019)'s work.
More importantly, this field gives us several tools and ways-of-thinking to understand the *shape* of data---I'll talk more about these as we go along.
In this blog post, I will apply these tools to analyze multilingual data, both synthetic and natural.

## Dataset 

In this work, we're going to use the [PolyglotTeachers-SFT-Synth](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ljvmiranda921/PolyglotTeachers-SFT-Synth) dataset from my previous work.
It contains synthetic data for six languages, Arabic, Czech, German, Spanish, Indonesian, Japanese, and Tagalog, using different data generation methods (generate from exemplars, translate from English to target language, respond in target language).
In the current version of this dataset, the texts were generated by Gemma 3 27B Instruct.

<iframe
  src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/ljvmiranda921/PolyglotTeachers-SFT-Synth/embed/viewer/default/train"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  height="560px"
></iframe>

<br />
In the next section, the format will look like this: I'll present a research question, talk a bit about the TDA tool I'm going to use, apply that tool, and then interpret the results.
Also, note that this blog post contains my initial explorations on TDA.
I tried my best to verify what I write here but there's a possibility that some of my interpretations (or methodologies) are wrong. 
Please correct me in the comments below if that is the case.

## Analyses

### RQ1: Does synthetic data have a simpler shape than natural data?



**Background**

**Setup**

**Finding**


### RQ2: Which synthesis strategy produces data topologically closest to natural data?


**Background**

**Setup**

**Finding**


### RQ3: What does data look like locally?

**Background**

**Setup**

**Finding**