---
layout: post
title: "Scaling Celeste Mountain"
date: 2020-08-01
category: life
comments: true
author: "LJ MIRANDA"
tags: [celeste, platformers, indie game dev, mental health]
description: |
    Celeste is one of the most memorable games I've played this year. A
    brilliant masterpiece, it developed in me a profound appreciation of games
    as a vehicle for creative expression. Read more about my journey in scaling
    the Celeste Mountain.
excerpt: |
    Celeste is one of the most memorable games I've played this year. A
    brilliant masterpiece, it developed in me a profound appreciation of games
    as a vehicle for creative expression. Read more about my journey in scaling
    the Celeste Mountain.
---

> Celeste is one of the most memorable games I've played this year. A
> brilliant masterpiece, it developed in me a profound appreciation of games
> as a vehicle for creative expression. Read more about my journey in scaling
> the Celeste Mountain.

**Prologue:** I've never been into video games when I was young.[^1] It didn't
occur to me that they can be subjects for serious thought or reflection.
However, the lockdowns forced me to find ways to fill my weekends without
programming.[^2] So I downloaded Steam, purchased my first few games &mdash;
*Terraria*, *Stardew Valley*, *Celeste* &mdash; and made the jump.


## Introduction: the First Steps


[Celeste](http://www.celestegame.com/) is a charming platformer where you play
a character named Madeline, a young woman dead-set on climbing the top of the
titular Mountain.  Along the way she'll meet new friends, deal with her inner
demons, and survive the hazards beset her trail. 

Sure, it's *just* a game about climbing a mountain, but it triumphs by pulling
me in to the struggles of Madeline, and connecting it to my own experiences
without feeling forced. Celeste was able to achieve this with its (1) masterful
storytelling, (2) tight mechanics and gameplay, and (3) genius use of visuals
and sound. By seeing how these three were weaved together into a singular
*experience*, I developed a profound appreciation for video games as a medium
and saw its potential for creative expression.

## Reach for the Summit

For the next three sections, I'll discuss how the narrative, mechanics, and
audio-visual techniques reinforce one another to form a cohesive experience.
This interplay made the game stand-out: nothing feels shoehorned-in, everything
fits perfectly like a platforming puzzle.


> Nothing feels shoehorned-in, everything fits perfectly like a platforming
> puzzle.


### Masterful storytelling

Celeste's story is simple yet packed with an emotional undertone: Madeline, our
protagonist, wants to reach the peak of Celeste mountain. What makes it
masterful is on how it was able to make me empathize with Madeline, both
in-game and in real-life. 


It has a light-hearted exterior: I personally enjoy meeting the quirky
side-characters with their silly, gibberish, and garbled voices:

<!-- Video clip of funny convo scene: YOLOOO -->


However, behind this cheerful backdrop lies a tale about anxiety, depression,
and the pressures of modern life (Marks,
[2018](https://www.ign.com/articles/2018/01/25/celeste-review)). Madeline
suffers from panic-attacks, drinks, and gets stressed. In Chapter 2, she
encounters her dark alternate, Badeline, that represents her insecurities, doubts,
and fears. Throughout the game, Badeline will taunt and chase me, culminating
in an epic boss fight in Chapter 6.

<!-- Badeline chase scene -->

Her motivation for the climb, "to overcome and accomplish *something*," wasn't
made explicit. However, I believe that it's intentional in order for us to project
our own goals and struggles as we play the game&mdash; and this is
where its genius lies:

<!-- Madeline quote scene -->


> Inasmuch as she [Madeline] wants to conquer Celeste the Mountain,
> metaphorically representing her fears and anxieties, I also want to conquer
> Celeste the game, and perhaps my own fears and anxieties too.


I empathize with Madeline because inasmuch as she wants to conquer Celeste the
Mountain, metaphorically representing her fears and anxieties, I also want to
conquer Celeste the game, and perhaps my own fears and anxieties too. This
two-fold interplay between in-game and real-life experience helped propel the
story forward. In some ways, I *am* Madeline; not only because I play her
character (her deaths and successes are my own), but also because I experience
her struggles and motivations. Her story does not end even after I close the
game or beat it. It continues to exist and grips me in this reality.

> Her story does not end even after I close the game or beat it. It continues
> to exist and grips me in this reality.


<!-- treating the subject delicately -->
Another thing that I like about Celeste's storytelling is on how it treated its
subject-matter delicately. It approached the topics of anxiety and depression with
kindness&mdash; not with an overly-pedantic tone. Acknowledging the innate
difficulty of precision-platformers, its message in the prologue is full of
hope: *"You can do this."*


<!-- You can do this screenshot -->

It never said "Hey, just talk to your friends!" or "Just do some meditation!"
Instead, it presents you a heartwarming conversation with Theo, and a mini-game
about a golden feather.[^3] The latter was particularly special because it caught me
off-guard: a perfect blend of gameplay, storytelling, and emotion on the
experience of panic-attacks.

<!-- GIF of golden feather game -->


Because of that, the "conclusion" of Madeline's struggle is very well-earned. At
the start of Chapter 6, just a few more distance to the summit, she will
fall back to the start and is again confronted by her dark side:

<!-- Madeline screenshot falling -->

By the end of its penultimate chapter (and again, after an epic boss battle),
Madeline realizes that instead of running away from Badeline, who represents
her doubts and anxieties, she must learn how to work and function with her.
Overcoming depression is not about *defeating it*, it's a Part of Me that I
need to accept and embrace. 

It's also noteworthy that "Badeline" isn't the in-game (or official) name of
Madeline's doppelganger. It's merely born from the gaming community's need for
shorter names. In-game, she's only referred to as a Part of Me/You. In my
opinion, this helps because we avoid labelling this Part of Us as "bad." I
think that without this pre-judgment, we can be more comfortable embracing it,
the same way Madeline did.


<!-- Screenshot badeline and madeline hug -->

Upon this realization, Madeline and this Part of Her will fuse, granting us the
ability to double-dash, for the final chapter to reach the summit. 

<!-- show double-dash GIF -->

The climb towards the summit isn't easy, even with the double-dash power-up (it's a
culmination of all previous chapters' environmental mechanics made
difficult). However, the journey towards the summit shows that **dealing with
one's depression is a process**: we see Madeline and this Part of Her converse with
one another, and work towards their differences as they traverse through the
Mountain.


Celeste's storytelling is masterful because it enables us to empathize with the
main character's struggles, and it continues to live outside the game.
Madeline and I share the same struggles&mdash;both in a platforming and
real-life sense&mdash;and by extension, her successes and failures are also my
own. Upon reaching the Summit, a picture of Madeline staring over the horizon
was shown. I leaned back to my chair, took in the view, and felt a sense of
elation and joy upon realizing what we've accomplished.

<!-- show summit photo -->

In the next section, we'll see how this tight storyline was made more vibrant
by weaving it through its intricate gameplay and solid mechanics.  Remember,
Celeste is not a Telltale Adventure game where you just click conversational
cues, it's a hard-platformer that demands creative problem-solving and precise
inputs to overcome immense difficulties.

### The Mechanics is the message

Earlier, I mentioned that the genius of Celeste's gameplay is in its ability to
make me empathize with Madeline's struggles as she scales the
Mountain&mdash;which, as we've seen in the first section, was communicated
through its story. Here, I'll discuss how it was achieved through
Celeste's precision-platformer mechanics, particularly, (1) by focusing on
player creativity, and (2) its forgiveness & patience.

Before we start, I'd like to talk about how difficult Celeste is! I mean, look
at this screen:

<!-- show a difficult screen from Chapter 3 -->

There are a lot of environmental mechanics: some screens don't have floors in
them, you gonna need to get the timing right, you have to conserve stamina, and
much more! Compound this with the fact that I haven't played platformer games
in a while, then the main storyline becomes harder than it should be.

<!-- I died in the prologue -->


Given these obstacles, Madeline's controls are limited: she can only jump, climb
walls, and dash&mdash; nothing more. There are no items, *souls* to collect,
nor magic. This **distillated mechanic places the responsibility on the
player to solve the platforming puzzles**. However, constraints conceive
creativity: the combination of these controls allows almost-acrobatic maneuvers
across the screen.

> Constraints conceive creativity


<!-- just get a GIF from a speed run -->

This brings us to my first reflection point: **the success of Madeline is in my
[our] hands**.  Her wins are my wins, and so are her deaths. It's not because
of a magic item or an overpowered stat boost that will make me zoom across the
screen. More importantly, puzzles can be cleared in more ways than one: I find
it fascinating to watch speedrunners clear screens in ways I never imagined.
This removes the "memorization mechanic" where you just need to do certain
button-presses and you're done. Sure it's constrained, but it's flexible enough
to endow some personal touch in completing these puzzles.

Before, I saw my anxiety as a constraint or weakness&mdash; I worry a lot and
think about things in the future. At first I thought of it as limiting and
crippling, especially given the insurmountable Mountain called Life that I need
to face.  However, just like Madeline's jump, climb, or dash, *constraints
conceive creativity.*[^4] I slowly learned to lean-in to this "weakness." For
example, it made me more confident in my planning skills:[^5] I can anticipate
potential paths where things might go wrong, break down vague objectives into
clearer ones, and so on.  Sure, **it's still difficult**, but just like any of
Celeste's platforming puzzles, I know I can clear it given my limited moveset.

<!-- Forgiveness and Patience -->

Celeste is self-aware of its difficulty. A key giveaway is the death counter
prominently shown at the end of each level, and some notes such as:

<!-- Insert postcard about not worrying about your death counter -->

In some ways, the ideas of Celeste fit precisely in a platformer game: it's
about trying over and over again, while overcoming the urge to give up.
However, what differentiates Celeste from similar games is its **forgiveness
and patience**. Sure, there's no health bar, and one tiny mistake kills you, but
death doesn't punish you so hard: instead of repeating the whole chapter, you
immediately start at the last screen you've been to. In addition, resurrection
is quick, Madeline just goes into a Megaman-like poof, and you're back again. 

This differs in some of the platformers I tried (in the course of writing this
post) like [*Super Meat
Boy*](https://store.steampowered.com/app/40800/Super_Meat_Boy/) or [*Dead
Cells*](https://store.steampowered.com/app/588650/Dead_Cells/),[^6] where there is
an element of rage and spite that motivates you to complete a level. Instead,
Celeste the game cheers for you and wishes you to succeed. Inasmuch as Celeste
is self-aware of its difficulty, it's also self-aware that it isn't
impossible&mdash; you just gotta keep trying.[^7]

In addition, the game is patient in introducing one mechanic after the other.
In the first chapter, it "teaches" you the concept of springs and spikes, then
later on you'll encounter a moving platform, and near the end you'll see a
combination of these mechanics. This "narrative" is done for each chapter, and
in a macro-level, throughout the game.[^8] If, for some instance, I skipped screens
and went to the latter parts of the game, I'd definitely feel intimidated once
I see those spike-covered floors, moving dust-bunnies, and strong winds in one
screen. However, because the game has patiently taught me its mechanics as I
progress, I instead find them more manageable.

In the end, Celeste's mechanics allows the player to experience Madeline's
struggles throughout the game, and at the same time forgiving and patient about
it. It's wonderfully-tight, given that the last power-up is simply a
double-dash, not some grand zooming ability. The game's final ascent is still
difficult, but it says something: overcoming anxiety and depression is a
process&mdash; catharsis is important but it will not magically heal you. 

The final level is wonderful, because it reminds you of how far you've come.
There will be multiple callbacks to all of previous chapters' gimmicks, but
this time it feels more manageable&mdash; just like looking back at top of the
mountain you just climbed. It's all because you failed, you learned, and you
tried again. 

### 


## Conclusion: Heart of the Mountain

<!-- crafted to illicit the same emotions that Madeline experiences throughout
the game -->
<!-- share with her catharsis -->


## Postscript: My Dearest Friends

### Footnotes

[^1]: The last console I had was a PSOne (the big boxy version) from my uncle, and a Gameboy SP back in grade school. I did play some games casually (Final Fantasy Tactics Advance, and Pokemon Sapphire comes to mind), but not with a deeper appreciation that I have today.
[^2]: I still do some open-source work such as answering Issues and reviewing PRs, but sometimes you just want to take a break! The last open-source project I did was [Sprites-as-a-Service](/sprites-as-a-service), go check it out!
[^3]: I later learned that the golden feather minigame was based from an actual [floating feather meditation technique](http://davidvago.bwh.harvard.edu/the-floating-feather-meditation-technique/). Someone replicated the [mini-game](https://github.com/FdelMazo/Feather) that you can try out (although I believe the experience will be more complete if you played the game)!
[^4]: A bit off-topic, but this learning, *constraints conceive creativity* made me drawn to pixel art. In Pixel Art, you're mostly working on a small canvass, and it "forces" you to creatively represent small details in low-resolution.
[^5]: I took Clifton's StrengthsFinder test a few months ago, and my Top 2 Strength is [Strategic](https://www.gallup.com/cliftonstrengths/en/252350/strategic-theme.aspx). It is expressed as someone who "create alternative ways to proceed and think in terms of options." It feels validating to see it expressed that way! 
[^6]: Don't get me wrong, I love Dead Cells! Albeit for different reasons (mostly on combat, tactics, and adaptability).
[^7]: I have yet to try the Assist Mode to practice some advanced maneuvers as I learn how to speedrun. Turning on Assist Mode "breaks" the game. However, the developer's messaging is wonderful: it's not cheating, it's OK to ask for help and there's no shame in that.
[^8]: The creators of Celeste [conducted a workshop in GDC](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4RlpMhBKNr0) (Games Developers Conference) about the game's level-design. It's definitely worth a watch if you have half an hour to spare! Very insightful and it shows the level of craftsmanship Matt and his team does.
