---
layout: post
title: "Scaling Celeste Mountain"
date: 2020-08-15
category: life
comments: true
author: "LJ MIRANDA"
tags: [celeste, platformers, indie game dev, mental health]
description: |
    Celeste is one of the most memorable games I've played this year. A
    brilliant masterpiece, it developed in me a profound appreciation of games
    as a vehicle for creative expression. Read more about my journey in scaling
    Celeste Mountain.
excerpt: |
    Celeste is one of the most memorable games I've played this year. A
    brilliant masterpiece, it developed in me a profound appreciation of games
    as a vehicle for creative expression. Read more about my journey in scaling
    Celeste Mountain.
---

> Celeste is one of the most memorable games I've played this year. A
> brilliant masterpiece, it developed in me a profound appreciation of games
> as a vehicle for creative expression. Read more about my journey in scaling
> the Celeste Mountain.

**Prologue:** I've never been into video games when I was young.[^1] It didn't
occur to me that they can be subjects for serious thought or reflection.
However, the lockdowns forced me to find ways to fill my weekends without
programming; so I downloaded Steam, purchased my first few games &mdash;
*Terraria*, *Stardew Valley*, *Celeste* &mdash; and made the jump.[^2]

* Introduction: the First Steps
* Reach for the Summit
    * Masterful storytelling
    * The Mechanics is the Message
    * Story in Sounds
* Conclusion: Heart of the Mountain
    * Postscript: My Dearest Friends


## Introduction: the First Steps


[Celeste](http://www.celestegame.com/) is a charming platformer where you play
a character named Madeline, a young woman dead-set on climbing the top of the
titular Mountain.  Along the way she'll meet new friends, deal with her inner
demons, and survive the hazards beset her trail. 

Sure, it's *just* a game about climbing a mountain, but it triumphs by pulling
me in to the struggles of Madeline, and connecting it to my own experiences
without feeling forced at all. Celeste was able to achieve this with its (1)
masterful storytelling, (2) tight mechanics and gameplay, and (3) genius use of
music. By seeing how these three were weaved together into a singular
*experience*, I developed a profound appreciation for video games as a medium
and saw its potential for creative expression.

## Reach for the Summit

For the next three sections, I'll discuss how the narrative, mechanics, and
music reinforce one another to form a cohesive experience.  This
interplay made the game stand-out: nothing feels shoehorned-in, everything fits
perfectly like a platforming puzzle.


> Nothing feels shoehorned-in, everything fits perfectly like a platforming
> puzzle.


### Masterful storytelling

Celeste's story is simple yet packed with an emotional undertone: Madeline, our
protagonist, wants to reach the peak of Celeste mountain. What makes it
masterful is on how it was able to make me empathize with Madeline, both
in-game and in real-life. 


It has a light-hearted exterior: I personally enjoy meeting the quirky
side-characters with their silly, gibberish, and garbled voices:

<!-- Video clip of funny convo scene: YOLOOO -->


However, behind this cheerful backdrop lies a tale about anxiety, depression,
and the pressures of modern life (Marks,
[2018](https://www.ign.com/articles/2018/01/25/celeste-review)). Madeline
suffers from panic-attacks, drinks, and gets stressed. In one of the early
sequences of the game, she encounters Badeline, her dark alternate, who serves
as a physical manifestation of her fears and anxieties. From that moment
forward, Badeline will taunt and chase me, culminating in an epic boss battle
in Celeste's penultimate chapter.

<!-- Badeline chase scene -->

Her motivation for the climb, "to overcome and accomplish *something*," wasn't
made explicit. I believe it was intentional so that we can project
our own goals and struggles as we play the game&mdash; and this is
where its genius lies:

<!-- Madeline quote scene -->


> Inasmuch as she [Madeline] wants to conquer Celeste the Mountain,
> metaphorically representing her life's insurmountable challenges, I also want
> to conquer Celeste the game, and perhaps my life's insurmountable challenges
> too.


I empathize with Madeline because inasmuch as she wants to conquer Celeste the
Mountain, metaphorically representing her life's insurmountable challenges, I
also want to conquer Celeste the game, and perhaps my life's insurmountable
challenges too. This two-fold interplay between in-game and real-life
experience helped propel the story forward. In some ways, I *am* Madeline; not
only because I play her character (her deaths and successes are my own), but
also because I experience her struggles and motivations. Her story does not end
even after I close the game or beat it. It continues to exist and grips me in
this reality.

> Her story does not end even after I close the game or beat it. It continues
> to exist and grips me in this reality.


<!-- treating the subject delicately -->
Another thing that I like about Celeste's storytelling is on how it treated its
subject-matter delicately. It approached the topics of anxiety and depression with
kindness&mdash; not with an overly-pedantic tone. Acknowledging the innate
difficulty of precision-platformers, its message in the prologue is full of
hope: *"You can do this."*


<!-- You can do this screenshot -->

It never said "Hey, just talk to your friends!" or "Just do some meditation!"
Instead, it presents you a heartwarming conversation with Theo, and a mini-game
about a golden feather.[^3] The latter was particularly special because it caught me
off-guard: it serves a perfect blend of gameplay, storytelling, and emotion on the
experience of panic-attacks.

<!-- GIF of golden feather game -->


Because of that, the "conclusion" of Madeline's struggle is very well-earned. At
the start of Chapter 6, just a few more distance to the summit, she will
fall back to the start and is again confronted by her dark side:

<!-- Madeline screenshot falling -->

By the end of its penultimate chapter (and again, after an epic boss chase
sequence), Madeline realizes that instead of running away from Badeline, who
represents her fears and anxieties, she must **learn how to work and function
with her.** Overcoming depression is not about *defeating it*, it's a Part of
Me that I need to accept and embrace. 

It's also noteworthy that "Badeline" isn't the in-game (or official) name of
Madeline's doppelganger. It's merely born from the gaming community's need for
shorter names. In-game, she's only referred to as a Part of Me/You. In my
opinion, this helps because we avoid labelling this Part of Us as "bad." I
think that without this pre-judgment, we can be more comfortable embracing it,
the same way Madeline did.


<!-- Screenshot badeline and madeline hug -->

Upon this realization, Madeline and this Part of Her will fuse, granting us the
ability to double-dash, for the final chapter to reach the summit. 

<!-- show double-dash GIF -->

The climb towards the summit isn't easy, even with the double-dash power-up (it's a
culmination of all previous chapters' environmental mechanics made
difficult). However, the journey towards the summit shows that **dealing with
one's depression is a process**: we see Madeline and this Part of Her converse with
one another, and work towards their differences as they traverse through the
Mountain.


Celeste's storytelling is masterful because it enables us to empathize with the
main character's struggles, and it continues to live outside the game.
Madeline and I share the same struggles&mdash;both in a platforming and
real-life sense&mdash;and by extension, her successes and failures are also my
own. Upon reaching the Summit, we're shown a picture of Madeline staring over
the horizon. I leaned back to my chair, took in the view, and felt a sense of
elation and joy upon realizing what we've accomplished.

<!-- show summit photo -->

In the next section, we'll see how this tight storyline was made more vibrant
by weaving it through its intricate gameplay and solid mechanics.  Remember,
Celeste is not a Telltale Adventure game where you just click conversational
cues, it's a hard-platformer that demands creative problem-solving and precise
inputs to overcome immense difficulties.

### The Mechanics is the message

Earlier, I mentioned that the genius of Celeste's gameplay is in its ability to
make me empathize with Madeline's struggles as she scales the
Mountain&mdash;which, as we've seen in the first section, was communicated
through its story. Here, I'll discuss how it was achieved through
Celeste's precision-platformer mechanics, particularly, (1) by focusing on
player creativity, and (2) its forgiveness & patience.

Before we start, I'd like to talk about how difficult Celeste is! I mean, look
at this screen:

<!-- show a difficult screen from Chapter 3 -->

Environmental hazards are scattered all throughout: spikes litter floors and
walls, objects kill you at a slightest touch, strong winds hinder your
movement, and much more! Add this to the fact that I haven't played platformer
games in a while, so it's no surprise that even the canon storyline is more
challenging than it should be.

<!-- I died in the prologue -->


Madeline's controls are also limited: she can only jump, climb walls, and
dash&mdash; nothing more. There are no items, *souls* to collect, nor magic.
Her mechanics emphasize the importance of **player skill** in solving the
platforming puzzles. Given this small moveset, clearing a screen may require
combining these movements to perform acrobatic maneuvers, or taking advantage
of the environment along her way.

<!-- just get a GIF from a speed run -->

This brings us to my first reflection point: **the success of Madeline is in my
[our] hands**.  Her wins are my wins, and so are her deaths. It's not because
of a magic item or an overpowered stat boost that will make me zoom across the
screen. More importantly, puzzles can be cleared in more ways than one: I find
it fascinating to watch speedrunners clear screens in ways I never imagined.
This removes the "memorization mechanic" where you just need to perform certain
button-presses and you're done. Sure it's constrained, but it's flexible enough
to endow some personal touch in completing these puzzles. In other words,
constraints conceive creativity.

> Constraints conceive creativity

Before, I saw my anxiety as a constraint or weakness&mdash; I worry a lot and
think about things in the future. At first I thought of it as limiting and
crippling, especially given the insurmountable Mountain called Life that I need
to face.  However, as with Madeline's jump, climb, or dash, *constraints
conceive creativity.*[^4] I slowly learned to lean-in to this "weakness." For
example, it made me more confident in my planning skills:[^5] I can anticipate
potential paths where things might go wrong, break down vague objectives into
clearer ones, and so on.  Sure, **it's still difficult**, but just like any of
Celeste's platforming puzzles, I know I can clear it given my limited moveset.

<!-- Forgiveness and Patience -->

Celeste is self-aware of its difficulty. A key giveaway is the death counter
prominently shown at the end of each level, and some notes such as:

<!-- Insert postcard about not worrying about your death counter -->

In some ways, the ideas of Celeste fit precisely in a platformer game: it's
about trying over and over again, while overcoming the urge to give up.
However, what differentiates Celeste from similar games is its **forgiveness
and patience**. Sure, there's no health bar, and one tiny mistake kills you, but
death doesn't punish you so hard: instead of repeating the whole chapter, you
immediately start at the last screen you've been to. In addition, resurrection
is quick, Madeline just goes into a Megaman-like poof, and you're back again. 

This differs in some of the platformers I tried (in the course of writing this
post) like [*Super Meat
Boy*](https://store.steampowered.com/app/40800/Super_Meat_Boy/) or [*Dead
Cells*](https://store.steampowered.com/app/588650/Dead_Cells/),[^6] where there is
an element of rage and spite that motivates you to complete a level. Instead,
Celeste the game cheers for you and wishes for you to succeed. Inasmuch as Celeste
is self-aware of its difficulty, it's also self-aware that it isn't
impossible&mdash; you just gotta keep trying.[^7]

In addition, the game is patient in introducing one mechanic after the other.
In the first chapter, it "teaches" you the concept of springs and spikes, then
later on you'll encounter a moving platform, and near the end you'll see a
combination of these mechanics. This "narrative" is done for each chapter, and
in a macro-level, throughout the game.[^8] If, for some instance, I skipped screens
and went to the latter parts of the game, I'd definitely feel intimidated once
I see those spike-covered floors, moving dust-bunnies, and strong winds in one
screen. However, because the game has patiently taught me its mechanics as I
progress, I instead find them more manageable.

In the end, Celeste's mechanics allows the player to experience Madeline's
struggles throughout the game, while being forgiving and patient about
it. It's wonderfully-tight, given that the last power-up is simply a
double-dash, not some grand zooming ability. The game's final ascent is still
difficult, but it says something: **overcoming anxiety and depression is a
process**&mdash; catharsis is important but it doesn't end there. 

The final level is wonderful because it reminds you of how far you've come.
There will be multiple callbacks to all of the previous chapters' gimmicks, but
this time it feels more doable&mdash; like looking back at top of the
mountain you just climbed. It's all because you failed, you learned, and you
tried again. 

### Story in Sounds

In the last two sections, we saw how the narrative and gameplay mechanics
dovetail to form a tight and cohesive experience, enabling me to share with
Madeline's struggles. Those two alone already makes Celeste a wonderful game,
but the masterful way it uses its soundtrack to heighten our experiences brings
this platformer into greater heights.

A major element of Celeste's composition is its use of *leitmotif*, a recurring
musical phrase that represents a theme or idea. In the game, this occured both
in (1) the melody, and (2) the characters' "instruments". Note that I will only
touch specific aspects of the soundtrack in this post, there's definitely a lot
that can be written on the game's OST and I'd happily recommend some works that
explored various aspects of Celeste's music.

The first few minutes of the game introduce us to two recurring
melodies: the sound of struggle in the *Prologue*, and the main theme in *First
Steps*. 

I'm hesitant to label *Prologue*'s melody as a motif because its callback only
happens at the end of the game. When we first encounter it, we're
in the middle of escaping a crumbling bridge. The fast tempo denotes the idea
of the struggle, the intensity increases, then it ends with a falling sound.

<!-- Sheet music for Proloue and First Steps -->
<!-- Youtube Link -->

<!-- https://www.reddit.com/r/celestegame/comments/akdo9w/just_a_casual_prologue_death/ -->

The *Prologue*'s music is memorable because my experience with it is unique.
After I completed the game and joined Celeste's subreddit, I learned that the
tutorial bird should teach you the dash mechanic as you're falling right away.
In my case, I fell (and laughably died) twice before the tutorial bird showed
up.[^9] Coupled with the falling sound, this experience cemented the idea that
this game is **really** hard. Deep in my subconscious, those exact notes and
descending tone ingrained the feeling of failure amidst the struggle. 

<!-- GIF of crumbling bridge -->

I want you to keep this tone in mind, because its callback later on is
satisfying. Moving on, let's head over one of the most apparent melodies
throughout the game.

The first level&mdash;and coincidentally its soundtrack, *First Steps*&mdash;
introduces us to the main theme:

<!-- Insert sheet music -->

I'd daresay that this could even be Madeline's theme, for we hear this in
crucial points of her climb. In the beginning, her theme evokes a sense of
wonder and exploration. We (the player) only know about the climb, but none of
the emotional undertone Madeline experiences. The atmosphere is blissful and
the song's overall arc is rousing: the initial clap-like beats (0:04) hype us
up, and the synth-like beats in the music's second phase  (starting at 1:04)
reminds us the difficulty of our ascent. It is challenging yet
promising, chock-full of determination that perfectly describes our main
character.

> [Madeline's theme] is challenging yet promising, chock-full of determination
> that perfectly describes our main character.

Madeline's theme finds us back in *Madeline and Theo*, after she experienced
all major challenges on her way up: being chased by her dark doppelgangers,
a difficulty spike in Chapter 3, a boss sequence with a ghastly concierge, a
panic-attack, and so on. *Madeline and Theo* is played during a heartwarming
scene with Theo, their campfire alit, sharing stories about their life. Because
the last time we heard her theme was in *First Steps*, the callback on this
scene evokes newfound determination, but this time, aware of the struggle
the Mountain possesses.

<!-- Madeline and Theo campfire scene --> 
<!-- Link to sheet music? --> 
<!-- Link to youtube video --> 

It is also noteworthy that *Starjump* comes after this song. It is a perfect
interlude that gives a more heightened feeling of overcoming diffifulties along
our way

<!-- Link to youtube video of Starjump --> 
<!-- Link to sheet music of starjump --> 

Determination comes into play again in *Confronting Myself*, at the final "boss
battle." Madeline is determined to reach into Badeline, resulting into a
"reverse chase sequence" where we're the one running after Badeline and she's
the one running away from us (while shooting lasers and deathly orbs along our
way). In-game, this arc was very long, testing the player's patience and mettle
all throughout.

<!-- Confronting myself youtube video --> 
<!-- Confronting myself sheet music --> 

Remember *Prologue*? Its frantic melody will reappear again in *Reach for the
Summit*, during the final ascent. Because my previous experience taught me that
this song is about failure (because oh boy, I died twice in the Prologue), I
got intimidated when I heard its initial notes, especially during the summit
run. As the notes race, I'm starting to doubt if I can actually finish this game...

But something changed, listen to the transition in 0:50 to 0:87. Compare this
with the original *Prologue* on the 0:42 mark.

<!-- Link to youtube video -->

There's no more falling tone! It's a subtle difference, but it was replaced by
something more heroic (the rhythm even reminds me of the Avengers theme). It
seems to tell me: "Yes, this is going to be difficult, but this time around,
you can do this." 

<!-- You can do this -->

...and then it transitions to Madeline's theme. She has found her bearings and
begins the climb.

<!-- Link to youtube video -->

<!-- Reach for the summit poster? -->

Another motif that helped communicate Madeline's struggles to the player is
through the use of "character instruments." Madeline is associated with the
piano, Theo with the guitar, and Badeline with the synth.





<!-- Maybe this is Madeline's internal monologue -->
<!-- segue to character instruments -->






<!-- Character instruments -->
<!-- Madeline: Piano, Theo: Guitar, Badeline: Synth -->
<!-- Madeline and Theo -->
<!-- Starjump -->
<!-- Confronting Myself: High bass-synth vs. Piano -->
<!-- Reach for the Summit near-summit -->



## Conclusion: Heart of the Mountain

<!-- crafted to illicit the same emotions that Madeline experiences throughout
the game -->
<!-- share with her catharsis -->


## Postscript: My Dearest Friends

### Footnotes

[^1]: The last console I had was a PSOne (the big boxy version) from my uncle, and a Gameboy SP back in grade school. I did play some games casually (Final Fantasy Tactics Advance, and Pokemon Sapphire comes to mind), but not with a deeper appreciation that I have today.
[^2]: I still do some open-source work such as answering Issues and reviewing PRs, but sometimes you just want to take a break! The last open-source project I did was [Sprites-as-a-Service](/sprites-as-a-service), go check it out!
[^3]: I later learned that the golden feather minigame was based from an actual [floating feather meditation technique](http://davidvago.bwh.harvard.edu/the-floating-feather-meditation-technique/). Someone replicated the [mini-game](https://github.com/FdelMazo/Feather) that you can try out (although I believe the experience will be more complete if you played the game)!
[^4]: A bit off-topic, but this learning, *constraints conceive creativity* made me drawn to pixel art. In Pixel Art, you're mostly working on a small canvass, and it "forces" you to creatively represent small details in low-resolution.
[^5]: I took Clifton's StrengthsFinder test a few months ago, and my Top 2 Strength is [Strategic](https://www.gallup.com/cliftonstrengths/en/252350/strategic-theme.aspx). It is expressed as someone who "create alternative ways to proceed and think in terms of options." It feels validating to see it expressed that way! 
[^6]: Don't get me wrong, I love Dead Cells! Albeit for different reasons (mostly on combat, tactics, and adaptability).
[^7]: I have yet to try the Assist Mode to practice some advanced maneuvers as I learn how to speedrun. Turning on Assist Mode "breaks" the game. However, the [developer's messaging](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NInNVEHj_G4) is wonderful: it's not cheating, it's OK to ask for help and there's no shame in that.
[^8]: The creators of Celeste [conducted a workshop in GDC](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4RlpMhBKNr0) (Games Developers Conference) about the game's level-design. It's definitely worth a watch if you have half an hour to spare! Very insightful and it shows the level of craftsmanship Matt and his team does.
[^9]: So yes folks, I died in the Prologue!
