---
layout: post
type: post
title: "Co-op games that saved my 2021"
date: 2021-12-31
category: life
comments: true
author: "LJ MIRANDA"
summary: 
excerpt: 
description: 
---


<span class="firstcharacter">M</span>y gaming life started when the pandemic
hit last year. Back then, I've only been playing single-player titles like
*Celeste*, *Hollow Knight*, and *Hades*. This year was no different: we still
had lockdowns, new variants, and I'm...still gaming. Being stay-at-home means
that I had less opportunities to interact with friends and meet new people.

Co-op games, with their emergent storytelling, built-in cooperation, and
(mostly) non-toxic community, saved my 2021: I was able to socialize while not
going out. In this blogpost, I'll talk about two co-op games in particular:
*Valheim* and *Deep Rock Galactic*.

- *Valheim* is a survival and sandbox video-game where you and your friends
    play as a dead Viking tasked to slay the five Forsaken. In-between, you
    build your shelter, cook food, and collect materials to upgrade your
    weapons and armor.

- *Deep Rock Galactic* (DRG) is a first-person shooter where you play as a dwarf
    working for an intergalactic space mining company. You can choose up to
    four classes, customize your weapons and look, and team up with three other
    dwarves to complete mining missions while fighting alien bugs. 

For the rest of this blogpost, I'll talk about how these two games developed
systems that encourage (1) storytelling, (2) cooperation, and (3) community,
which in turn made my 2021 so much better.


## Emergent storytelling




1. emergent storytelling
- solves: you can't bond with them anymore, less shared memories
- bonding experience
- it's not: remember the time we stayed overnight at this diner? it's more remember that time we did X and Y

- Valheim: ability to surprise you and keep you on your feet
- DRG: frantic escape sequences, instance-based there's always something new

## Cooperation, not competition

2. cooperation, not competition
- solves: 
- less sweaty, less salty
- more chill

## Fostering a healthy community

3. fostered a non-toxic community
- meet other people
- i feel more secure, especially if you're with other people online (like you don't know them etc.)

